# Overview

As described in the introduction, NixOS is a GNU/Linux distribution with a
declarative system configuration manager. The whole operating system is built by
the Nix package manager from a description in a purely functional language, also
called Nix.

For the purpose of this section, we'll consider the Nix language as a black box,
and we'll treat `configuration.nix` as a configuration file with a slightly
alien syntax.


## For those at the Melbourne :: Compose 2019 workshop

We've already changed the configuration in our NixOS system to ensure we can use
mdns and to set up a local proxy-cache to download packages from. We did it in
two steps:

1. we edited the `configuration.nix` file
2. we ran the `nixos-rebuild` command

The current section of the workshop will address how to achieve different goals
using these two tools: edit configuration and rebuild.


## Structure of /etc/nixos/configuration.nix

A `configuration.nix` file is really a function definition in the Nix language.
It usually starts with `{config, pkgs, ... }:` which means it takes two
arguments: config and pkgs. Then it returns a set of option definitions
(key/value pairs of the form `{ option = definition; }`) that, processed by
nixos-rebuild, updates the system. We'll explain later how this works.


We've included a sample file in the repo that we recommend you look
at as you go through this description. 

@@TODO (JC) INCLUDE SAMPLE configuration.nix FILE

  - `boot`: Most systems will use Grub 2, which can be configured to boot with
    BIOS or UEFI.
  - `fileSystems`: Defines and mounts filesystems, but changing this
    configuration will only affect mount options, not formatting. That is: if
    you have a `vfat` filesystem and change the `fsType` option to `ext4`, the
    mount will stop working, but your data won't be compromised by a
    reformatting.
  - `imports`: Nix files are modular, and `configuration.nix` is no exception.
    The default `configuration.nix` generated by a clean install with
    `nixos-install` will generate a second `hardware-configuration.nix` that
    gets imported at the head of the file. Another example: the server running
    the nixpkgs cache-proxy for this workshop is configured by including a .nix
    file into its `configuration.nix`:
      ```
        imports =
         [ # Include the results of the hardware scan.
           ./hardware-configuration.nix
           # Binary cache proxy for the NixOS tutorial at Compose 2019
           ./nix-binary-cache-proxy.nix
         ];
       ```
  - `nix`: Configuration for the Nix package manager itself. you can add new
    binary caches for built packages, or public keys for the new binary caches.
    For instance, if you want to save yourself compiling the `leksah` editor for
    Haskell, you can use the public binaries compiled by IOHK:
      ```
        nix.binaryCaches = [ 
          "https://hydra.iohk.io"
          "http://cache.nixos.org/"
        ];

        nix.binaryCachePublicKeys = [
          "hydra.iohk.io:f/Ea+s+dFdN+3Y/G+FDgSq+a5NEWhJGzdjvKNGv0/EQ= cache.nixos.org-1:6NCHdD59X431o0gWypbMrAURkbJ16ZPMQFGspcDShjY="
        ];
      ```
  - `hardware`: What it says on the tin. Mostly binary blobs and proprietary
    drivers.
  - `nixpkgs`: Configuration about which package sets you want discoverable on
    your system. The following configuration options speak for themselves, so
    the comments explain why one might want to use them:
      ```
        nixpkgs.config = {
          # Mostly because of the need for MicroSoft fonts and Steam:
          allowUnfree = true;
          # because EVDI/displaylink was broken on the update to 19.03 Koi
          # but not broken enough that it was completely useless:
          allowBroken = true;
        };
      ```
    The `nixpkgs.overlay` attribute can also be used to extend and change the
    set of available packages. It's NixOS's equivalent to Debian package
    pinning.
  - `time`: Configure your system's timezone.
      ```
        time.timeZone = "Australia/Melbourne";
      ```
  - `i18n`: Configure your system's font, keymap, locale...
      ```
        i18n = {
          consoleFont = "Fira Mono";
          consoleKeyMap = "us";
          defaultLocale = "en_AU.UTF-8";
        };
      ```
  - `networking`: Set your system's hostname, enable a firewall and define open
    ports.
  - `environment`: This defines the default profile's environment. Among other
    things, this means that here we can configure the applications that will be
    available to the root profile and to users' profiles by default.
  - `services`: NixOS has a number of systemd-configured services it can run.
    From openssh to nginx, from avahi/mdns to printing... even the X11 windowing
    system is defined as a NixOS/systemd service.
  - `Virtualisation`: virtualbox, xen, libvirt and docker are among the
    pre-defined virtualsation services that NixOS offers. Note that these aren't
    installed as applications! Let's enable all of them at the same time:
      ```
        virtualisation.virtualbox.host.enable = true;
        nixpkgs.config.virtualbox.host.enableExtensionPack = true;
        
        virtualisation.libvirtd.enable = true;
        
        virtualisation.docker.enable = true;
      ```
    Note that, for users to be able to use virtualisation, they need to be added
    to the corresponding unix groups (see below).
  - `users`: User and group creation is also managed as part of NixOS: removing
    a user and running `nixos-rebuild` will not delete their `/home/username`
    directory, but will delete them from the generated `/etc` files in the
    current profile as if they'd never existed.
      ```
        users.extraUsers.nedkelly = {
          isNormalUser = true;
          description = "Ned Kelly";
          extraGroups = [
            "adbusers"
            "audio" "disk" "docker" "networkmanager" "plugdev"
            "systemd-journal" "wheel" "vboxusers" "libvirtd" "video"
          ];
          uid = 1000;
        };

        users.defaultUserShell = "/run/current-system/sw/bin/bash";
      ```
    Please remember to give your new user a password with `passwd`.

## `nixos-rebuild`: what it says on the tin

The nixos-rebuild command takes a NixOS system in a working state and a
`configuration.nix` file, and returns a changed working state according to the
configuration file. Here are the most common subcommands:

  - `nixos-rebuild switch`: Build the new system configuration, activate it and
    add it to GRUB as the new default boot option.
  - `nixos-rebuild boot`: Build the new system configuration and add it to GRUB
    as the new default boot option, but don't activate it. The system continues
    running the previous configuration.
  - `nixos-rebuild test`: Build the new system configuration and activate it,
    but don't add it to GRUB as the new default boot option, but don't activate
    it. If you need to reboot, the new configuration won't be available on the
    boot menu.
  - `nixos-rebuild build`: Build the new system configuration, but don't
    activate it nor add it to the GRUB boot menu.

Other subcommands are useful for debugging by performing dry runs or building
qemu virtual machines. Check `man nixos-rebuild` if you want to learn more.

The `nixos-rebuild` command also has options. Here are the most common:

  - `--upgrade`: fetches the latest version of NixOS from the NixOS channel
    before rebuilding.
  - `--install-bootloader`: use to reinstall the bootloader after changing the
    device configuration.
  - `--no-build-nix`: usually, nixos-rebuild first builds the latest version of
    the Nix package manager before rebuilding. This option disables this.
  - `--fast`: equivalent to `--no-build-nix --show-trace`. Use when you're
    calling `nixos-rebuild` frequently.
  - `--rollback`: Don't build a new configuration based on
    /etc/nixos/configuration.nix. Rather, roll back the previous configuration.
  
More options allow you to declare remote builders, change profiles (GRUB
submenus) to install your new configuration at, and even target a different host
to activate the new configuration on. As always, check `man nixos-rebuild`.

## Now type this

Let's add some applications to your NixOS install. But within reason, you don't want
to spend all the workshop downloading! Here are some things we recommend you
install now.

Please gain root in your NixOS system with `sudo su`, edit
`/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` and add the following:

```nix
environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [
  wget htop tree screen file psmisc
  fd ripgrep
  git
  xorg.xkill
];
```

Since we're at it, why not add your own user?

```nix
users.extraUsers.YOUR_USERNAME = {
  isNormalUser = true;
  description = "NAME SURNAME";
  extraGroups = [
  "systemd-journal"
  "wheel"
  "networkmanager"
  ];
```

Now run `nixos-rebuild --switch` so the new configuration takes root.

And you can try `# su YOUR_USERNAME` and become your new user. Remember to set a password with `passwd`.

## What's next
